This video will learn about C++ vectors.
Suppose we want to store test scores for students in a class but registration hasn't started yet.
So I don't know how many students I have to class.
Also students drop and add as the semester progresses.
How can I model this information using an array as we've seen to this point.
Remember C++ arrays are fixed in size and I need to specify a size when I declare them.
So what are my options.
Well I can always set the fixed size of the array to a size large enough so that it's unlikely I'll
have more than that number of students many times.
This option is OK but you'll probably make it too big in a way space.
For example we may have 30 students in the class but we allocated 50 students in the array.
Not only have I wasted storage space but now I need to keep track of how many students are actually
in the array.
And of course sooner or later you'll get that one student that exceeds the size of the array.
So what do we do.
Well we can use a dynamic array such as a vector to solve some of these problems.
A C++ vector is part of the C++ standard template library.
This is a library of powerful containers.
Algorithms functions and iterators.
This means that we have available to us pre-written pre-tested easy to use components that we can use
to help us solve our problems.
We'll go over the main components of the standard template library toward the end of this course.
We've talked about C++ being an object oriented language well when we create a C++ vector we are creating
a C++ object and we can ask the object to perform operations for us.
Vectors can grow and shrink in size at runtime so it's a perfect choice to model my students.
Vectors also provide syntax and semantics similar to a race.
So what we've learned about arrays understanding vectors will be pretty easy.
In addition to the array like syntax we can also use lots of really powerful functions like short reverse
erase find and more vectors also give us the ability to use methods that provide bounds checking if
we wish.
Let's see how we can declare vectors.
There are several ways to declare a vector.
The syntax for declaring a vector changes slightly from that of declaring an array because vectors are
objects.
First we must include the vector library also the vector type is part of the standard library so we
must either use the namespace or use standard in the scope resolution operator.
We can create a vector of any type we want just like we did with arrays.
Here's a syntax for vectors.
Don't worry at this point what the differences are will cover this in a future section.
Since the vector is an object oriented template class we must include the type of the elements of the
vector inside the angle brackets.
So for example vowels is a vector or a collection of characters.
Test scores is a factor of integers.
Both these examples create an empty vector that contains no elements.
Let's look at a few other ways to declare vectors in the first example we declared vowels to be a vector
containing five characters.
In this case I'm not providing an initializer list would do that in the next slide.
Instead I'm using constructor initialization syntax which provides information inside parentheses.
This tells the compiler that you want 5 characters in the second example we declare a vector named Test
scores of 10 integers.
Unlike arrays these ten integers will be automatically set to zero.
I don't have to do that explicitly myself.
We can also use initializer lists as we did with a raise to initialize vector elements in this first
example.
We declare vowels to be a vector containing five characters in the first example we declare and an issue
Alais the vowels vector to the characters.
I o you note that there are single quotes around the character literals not double quotes.
In the second example we declare and initialize a vector name.
Test scores to the integers.
198.
89 85 and 93 is a third example.
Notice it or two values in the parentheses.
The first value a parameter is the initial size of the vector.
In this case 365 the second value is what you want to initialize all the 365 doubles to.
In this case we're declaring a vector of 365 doubles and we're initializing all of those doubles to
eighty point zero degrees Fahrenheit.
There are also many other ways to declare victory.
You could declare a vector to be a copy of an array or a copy of another vector.
I think you're beginning to see how powerful vectors can be compared to arrays.
So let's do a quick recap about vectors.
We learned that vectors are an object oriented container defined in the standard template library.
We must include the vector include file to use them and they belong to the standard namespace like arrays.
Vectors allow you to tell the compiler to give you a collection of as many elements as you want and
give the entire collection a single name.
Vectors are dynamic and size which means they can grow and shrink as needed at runtime like arrays.
Vector data is stored contiguously in memory vector elements are individually accessible.
Vector indexes started 0 and end up position size minus one.
If you use the subscript operator that's the square brackets to access vector elements then vectors
will provide no bounds checking this provides the same behavior as arrays.
However vectors provide a rich set of functions that do provide type checking.
As a programmer you can decide what you need to use unlike arrays when you declare a vector.
The vector elements will automatically be initialized to zero unless you specify otherwise.
So if you declare a vector of 10 integers these integers will be initialized to 0.
They won't contain garbage.
Vectors are very efficient.
And finally we commonly use iteration or looping to process vectors just like we do in a race.
Later in this section we'll talk about C++ vectors in the next video we'll look at how we can access
individual vector elements and will also see a few of those useful vector functions I mentioned.